Here now for your afternoon
session is Becky Willrich.
Hello.
So,
we're here to talk about managing I/O,
and in particular,
how CFRunLoop fits into that,
and then CFStream leveraging CFRunLoop.
And I wanted to start out by sort
of explaining the motivation,
because CFRunLoop,
most of you have probably
heard of it before,
but it's frequently frightening
or confusing or difficult
to look at and understand.
So, we're going to hopefully
dispel some of that,
but also I want to explain why it
came into being in the first place.
So, when you manage I/O inside
your application,
you have this common problem.
Compared to the other
things you are doing,
managing I/O is a very slow,
lengthy process.
You're just sitting there waiting
for bytes to arrive from somewhere.
On the other hand, once the bytes arrive,
they don't require a lot of CPU time.
So you don't want the computer
sitting there waiting for the bytes.
You'd really like to use the
CPU for other things at the time.
One traditional solution to this
has been to go multi-threaded
and let one thread sit blocking,
waiting for I/O,
while the other threads process.
The problem with that approach is
that multi-threading is complex,
and you have to go through all of these
hoops to protect and manage your data.
So what would be really nice is
if you could let someone else,
some other part of the program,
deal with watching the pipe.
And you would simply be informed
whenever processing needed to be done.
So someone would essentially
poke you and say,
"Hey, there are bytes here.
Please deal with them."
That way you could handle the
I/O in these small bursts as packets
arrive amidst the other events,
like the user moving the
mouse or clicking on a button.
The advantage here is that
when you are dealing with I/O,
you know that you're
the only one running.
You know that you own the CPU.
So you don't have to go to all this
extra work to protect your objects.
So, how do you accomplish this?
You need a multiplexer.
You need some object that sits
and watches a number of different
inputs and shares out the
CPU between them as events occur.
Each input will only be triggered
when work needs to be done.
And then when that input
has been triggered,
it's promised that it's the only one
doing any processing at that point.
It knows it owns all the
memory and all the CPU.
So on our system,
that fundamental multiplexer
is the CFRunLoop.
The inputs are represented
by another cf.type,
CFRunLoop source, and out of the box,
there are several predefined inputs
for a number of common sources.
If that's not adequate to your needs,
it is possible to define new sources
that will then sit on the same
underlying CFRunLoop mechanism.
This way, all the user events,
all the I.O., all the IPC gets
multiplexed onto a single
thread with a single mechanism.
So that's sort of the motivation
behind the run loop as a whole.
What we're going to do now is
talk some about CFRunLoop itself,
look at the common
sources that are provided,
then we're going to move on to talk
about CFStream for a little while.
We'll talk about what it is,
what it does.
A stream has a fixed lifetime as
it moves through a state diagram.
We're going to look at those stages.
And then finally we're going to
look at how CFStream works with
CFRunLoop to make it possible to manage
sockets in particular on the run loop.
And with that,
I'd like to bring Doug Davidson up
to introduce CFRunLoop to you.
[Transcript missing]
Now here's a sequence of events
while the run loop is running.
The run loop waits.
Something interesting happens.
The run loop decides which of its sources
needs to be triggered as a result.
The corresponding client
receives a callback,
and the callback returns and
the run loop waits again.
Now, there are many different
interfaces to the run loop:
Cocoa, Carbon, Core Foundation,
CFNetwork,
but they all deal with the same
underlying run loop object.
There is exactly one run loop per thread.
You do not create it,
you do not destroy it,
it's just there automatically for you,
and all these different
interfaces act upon it.
That's what allows us to
integrate them all together.
Carbon, Cocoa, Core Foundation,
CFNetwork, they can all work together
because they all deal with
the same underlying run loop.
Now, CFRunLoop is the core foundation
level interface to the run loop.
And you would use CFRunLoop if,
for example, you wanted to use one of
the run loop sources that's
defined in core foundation,
or if you're working with
something that's defined at
the core foundation level,
like CFNetwork, or if you have a need to
run the run loop yourself.
Now,
how does the run loop generally get run?
If you are on the main thread in
a Cocoa or Carbon application,
then normally you will not need
to run the run loop yourself,
because it will be run for you as part
of the application's main event loop.
So, for example, in Carbon,
running the run loop is at the
heart of run application event loop.
In Cocoa,
NSApplication will typically run the run
loop for you as part of its event loop,
without you doing anything at all.
If you're in some other situation,
if you're on, say,
a secondary thread in one
of these applications,
or if you're in something that
doesn't use Cocoa or Carbon at all,
then you may need to run
the run loop yourself.
And you can do that
with the CFRunLoop APIs,
either with the simple CFRunLoop run,
or the more complicated
CFRunLoop run in mode.
Now, I guess this is the point at which
I should say something about modes.
A run loop may have many
different sources attached to it,
but you may not want to have all
of them active at any given time.
For example, you might have a timer that
you don't want to fire while a
control is tracking the mouse.
To make this possible,
we have a mechanism called modes.
At any given time,
the run loop is running.
It's running with some specific mode,
and any source that's registered
with the run loop is registered
with some list of modes.
That source will be active and able
to be triggered only when the run
loop is running in one of those modes.
Most of the time, the run loop will be
running in the default mode,
and most sources will be
registered with at least that mode.
But frameworks and subsystems
can define their own modes.
For example, in Cocoa,
there is a special mode,
the MotoPanel run loop mode,
that is used while a MotoDialog is up.
And there's another one that's used
while controls are tracking the mouse.
There is also one shortcut.
You can register a source for
the so-called common modes,
and that is just those modes that
happen to have been registered
as being "common." For example,
in Cocoa, that would be the default mode,
plus those other two I mentioned,
the event tracking mode
and the modal panel mode.
As I say, most of the time you'll
be using the default mode.
It is also possible to run the
run loop in your own custom mode,
and the point of that would
be that if you do that,
then you know for sure that only
those sources that you yourself
have registered with that mode
can fire while you're doing that.
Most of the time, though,
you use the default mode.
Now, the run loop by itself is
not terribly interesting.
What's interesting is the
things that it can wait for,
that is, its sources.
So today I'm going to be talking
about some of the run loop sources
that are defined in core foundation:
CFRunLoopTimer, CFMessagePort,
CFMachPort, CFSocket.
Becky will come back up and talk
in much more detail about CFStream.
Other frameworks and subsystems can
define their own run loop sources,
and you can even to find your own,
although I'm not going to
be going into that today.
So before I get into specifics,
I should say some general things about
the core foundation run loop sources.
One point to note is that in order to
distinguish one source from another,
core foundation usually allows
you to attach to each source
what's called a context,
which is just a fancy name
for an arbitrary pointer that
you can use however you like,
and some functions that
it uses to deal with it.
Becky will discuss that
in more detail later on.
Another point is that normally
when you want to dispose of
a core foundation object,
you just release it.
With the core foundation
run loop sources,
normally you will also have
to invalidate the source.
That tells it that it will
never be needed again,
that it can get rid of any underlying
system resources that it may be using,
and remove itself from run loops.
Then you can release
it and it will go away.
Another thing that sometimes comes
up is that the sources have an
integer order for -- that comes
into play only when there are many
sources that are firing at once,
and the run loop has to decide
which one to call first.
That's not terribly common.
One more thing I should say is that
although I'm going to speak about all
these objects as run loop sources,
because core foundation doesn't
have a full object oriented system,
in many cases there is a small
auxiliary object which actually
formally acts as the run loop source,
and we'll see that in
an example later on.
So let me talk about the
first kind of run loop source,
the CFRunLoop timer.
You remember I said that one of the
things the run loop can wait for is
the arrival of some predetermined time.
CFRunLoop timer allows you to get
a callback when some time arrives,
or if you like,
some repeating sequence of times.
Now, the run loop is not a
real time mechanism.
What this means is that when
the run loop has control,
it checks to see if your
timer's time has arrived,
and if it has, then you get a callback,
but only if the run loop is running.
So to create a CFRunLoop timer,
you specify a callback.
And you specify the
first time it will fire,
and optionally some interval after
which it will repeatedly fire.
Then you add it to the run
loop with some set of modes.
And when the run loop is
running and your time arrives,
you'll get your callback.
If you don't have the timer repeat,
then it's automatically invalidated.
It only fires once and is
automatically invalidated afterwards.
If it does repeat,
then you have to invalidate it yourself
when you're done with it and you no
longer want it to fire ever again.
Let's take a look at some code.
First line here, we are creating a timer.
We specify the callback, my callback.
We specify the first time
at which it should fire.
Here that's CFAbsoluteTimeGetCurrent,
which means now,
i.e., as soon as possible.
And an interval after
which it will fire again.
Here, 1.0 seconds.
So it will fire one second from
now and every second thereafter
until it's invalidated.
Now, you remember that I said there is
exactly one run loop per thread.
In almost every case,
we'll be dealing with the
so-called current run loop,
that is,
the run loop for the current thread.
So we get the current run loop here,
and we add this timer to the run loop.
In this case, I've chosen to do it
with the common modes.
That's convenient.
Now, if we were in a Cocoa or
Carbon application,
we'd be done.
The framework would run
the run loop for us,
and all we'd have to do is sit
back and wait for our callback.
If we're in some other situation,
we may need to run the
run loop ourselves,
and we can do that with CFRunLoop Run.
Let me talk about another rather
different kind of run loop source,
the CFMessagePort.
This is an IPC mechanism.
There are many, many different
IPC mechanisms in Mac OS X.
CFMessagePort is the primary
IPC mechanism that's defined
at the core foundation level.
This is lower level than Apple events
in the sense that the messages that are
transferred are not structured messages,
they're just bags of bytes.
This is a local IPC mechanism.
You can use it between threads
or processes on one machine.
It has two modes,
a one-way asynchronous mode and another
mode that can be used where you've got
to reply and call it synchronously.
This is higher level than something like
sockets or pipes in that it makes use
of the core foundation abstractions and,
in particular, the run loop.
So to use CFMessagePort, one side,
we'll call it the server,
creates a local message port,
CFMessagePort create local,
and advertises it with a name,
which is just a CFString.
The other side, we'll call it the client,
looks up that message port by that
name and gets a reference to what
to it is a remote message port,
CFMessagePortCreatedRemote.
The messages that are sent are,
as I've said, just strings of bytes with,
that is, CFDatas.
You'll also get an integer message
ID you can put on it if you like.
The reply, if you have a reply,
is also a CFData.
And the client and the server simply
have to agree on how these things
are supposed to be interpreted.
Learn to use this.
The server will add its local message
port to the run loop with some
set of modes and run the run loop.
The client will call
CFMessagePortSendRequest.
and if there's no reply,
that just returns immediately.
If you wait for a reply,
then it blocks waiting for a reply.
The message will arrive at the server,
the server will get a
call back in its run loop,
and deal with it.
If there's to be a reply,
then the server returns the reply,
comes back to the client,
and the client's
CFMessagePortSendRequest call returns.
What if you want to go a little
lower down in the system and
actually deal with Mach messages,
but you want to do it in the run loop?
I'm not going to say anything
detailed about Mach messages here,
but those of you who have dealt
with the Mach APIs will know
that you can do many interesting
and powerful things with them,
like transfer portions of an address
space from one process to another.
It would be very convenient if you could
wait for a Mach message in the run loop.
For that, we have a run loop
source called CFMockPort.
And all it does is allow
MockPort to serve as a run loop
event source so that you get a
callback when a message arrives.
And you can create it with an
existing mach port if you have one,
or you can allow it to
create the mach port for you.
Again, you add it to the run loop
with some set of modes,
and when the run loop is running,
when a message arrives on that port,
you get a callback pointing
you to the message.
Very simple.
So, now we come to the part of the talk
that's most relevant for CFNetwork,
and that is, what if you want to do
the same sort of thing,
not for a Mach message,
but for a BSD socket?
And for that we have another kind
of run loop source called CFSocket.
Now, this is not intended as some
sort of complete wrapper over
the BSD socket functionality.
You still have the underlying socket to
which you can do all sorts of socket-ish
things like setSockOpt and so forth.
But now in addition we have the CFSocket,
which allows the socket to
serve as a run loop source,
which means that you can be notified
in your run loop when interesting
things happen to this socket.
The interesting things,
depending on what sort
of socket you have,
may be when data arrives to be read,
when the socket is available for writing,
when a connection
arrives and is accepted,
or when a connection attempt succeeds.
Depending, again,
on what sort of socket this is.
And this can be essentially
any kind of socket:
TCP, UDP, IVv4, IVv6,
even the local UNIX domain sockets.
Doesn't matter.
So, for example,
what this means is that if you're
writing a Cocoa or a Carbon application,
you don't need to have a separate thread
to handle your networking with sockets.
You can create CFSockets for them,
and you can be notified when things
happen to them in your main event loop.
Again, you can create a CF socket with an
existing BSD socket if you have one,
or you can choose to have CFSocket
create the socket for you.
And when you create the CF socket,
you specify what callback will be called,
and you specify what sort of
events you want to be called for.
Again, this will depend on what
sort of socket you have.
Now, I don't want to let you leave
here without presenting a
complete working code example.
So I thought I'd present
a little HTTP server.
But to make it simple enough to present,
I had to make it really simple.
So we're not going to try to
parse the incoming request at all.
We're just going to return
a single constant response.
So this is going to use a TCP socket,
and so it will follow a familiar pattern.
That is, we have one socket that
is bound to a port,
listens, and accepts connections.
When a connection arrives,
there will be a new child socket for that
connection that we use to read and write.
And just now for each of
these we'll have a CF socket.
So first I'm going to create
the socket that will be bound
and listen for new connections.
And I've decided to let
CFSocket create it for me.
And here in this creation call,
I specify my callback, accept connection,
and I specify what kind of events
it's going to be called for.
In this case,
it's going to be called with
KCF socket accept callback,
that is, when new connections
arrive and are accepted.
And the other thing I have to specify
is what kind of socket this is and
what port it's going to be bound to.
So for that I use a plain
old struct SocketOrIn,
in this case specifying port 1234,
which I picked at random.
And to pass that to CFSocket,
I wrap it in a CFData.
and include that in a structure
called a socket signature,
which all this does is it tells
CFSocket what kind of socket this is.
These are the standard
BSD constants for a TCP socket.
Now, remember that I said in some cases
there is a small auxiliary object
which acts as the run loop source.
This is one of these cases.
We call CFSocketCreateRunLoopSource
to get the actual run loop
source auxiliary object.
Then, as in the timer example,
we get the current run loop and
we add the source to the run loop.
In this case, I've chosen to do it
with the default mode.
Because I wanted this to
be a standalone example,
I'm going to run the
run loop here myself.
At this point,
all we do is sit back and we wait,
and we will get a callback when a new
connection arrives and is accepted.
So what does that callback look like?
This callback is going to
pass into us a new BSD socket
for that accepted connection.
And again,
I want to create a CF socket for that.
So here I use the form of creation that
creates it with an existing socket.
And I specify another callback,
receiveData,
that will be called when data
arrives on this new connection.
And I specify the KCF socket
data callback type.
That means I will be called,
I will have CFSocket read the
data for me and pass it to me.
Same thing again.
I get the run loop
source for the CF socket.
I add it to the current run loop with,
again, the default mode,
and I release it so I don't leak it.
So the only thing left to do is to
define the callback we will get when data
actually arrives on this new connection.
And that is a received data callback.
As I said,
I'm not going to try to do anything
with this request that I'm getting.
I'm just going to throw it away
and return a fixed response.
So I have a string here that is
just "Hello World" in HTTP speak,
and for use with CFSocket,
and I'm wrapping that in a CFData.
And then I use a CFSocket function that
just sends data off on that socket.
I release that data so I don't leak it.
Now I'm done with this.
We're not using persistent connections,
so we're done with this connection.
We're not going to use it anymore.
The only thing left is to close it down.
You remember that I spoke of
invalidating run loop sources.
So what we do at this point is
that we invalidate the CF socket.
That tells us--tells it that
we never want to use it again.
That closes the underlying
socket and removes it from
run loops--from the run loops.
And then we release it, and we're done.
That's a complete example.
And now I'm going to turn
things back over to Becky,
who will talk to you in
more detail about CFStream.
Thanks, Doug.
Okay, so now we want to spend a little
more time about one particular
kind of run loop source,
a CFStream.
Unlike the ones that,
the sources that Doug spoke about,
CFStream was new in 10.1.
All the other sources have
been around since 10.0.
So, what is a CFStream?
Well, at its heart,
it's simply a one-directional
stream of bytes.
Part of the idea is that you
don't need to know where you're
writing to or reading from.
The stream abstracts all of that away.
There are two CF types
to represent streams:
CFReadStriem and CFWriteStriem.
and as the stream exists
inside your program,
it will move through certain
definite states in its lifetime.
We're going to take a closer
look at that lifetime now.
So there it is drawn as a state
diagram and we're going to walk
through each of those step by step.
When the stream is first created,
it's in the not open state.
At this point, the stream merely exists
as memory in your program.
It's not using any system resources.
It's not doing any processing yet.
This is the time when you
want to configure the stream.
You know nothing's going on,
so you can set up the stream to behave
precisely the way you want it to.
Once the stream is fully configured,
you move on to the next state by calling
CFReadStriem or CFWriteStriem open.
Once the stream has... pardon
me... once open has been called,
we're going to move
on to the next states.
This is the time when the stream is going
to start reserving its system resources.
And you should keep in mind
that this process may take time.
For instance,
a socket may choose to wait until
it's become fully connected,
until the remote end has sent back an
act saying that the pipe is fully formed.
That's what the state opening is for.
It means that the open has begun,
but has not yet completed.
Once opening has completed,
the stream will move into the state open.
Once the stream is open,
and for most of the
lifetime of the stream,
you're going to be moving back
and forth between the open state
and the reading and writing state.
Reading and writing occurs when you
call readStreamRead or writeStreamWrite,
matches the POSIX calls that
you may have used before.
It's going to return the number of bytes.
You're going to give them a byte buffer.
It's going to return to you the number
of bytes filled if you're reading,
or written out if you're writing.
It'll return zero if you've
reached the end of the stream,
or negative one if some
error has occurred.
Now one thing to note is you don't
actually have to wait for the
state to transition to open before
you start reading or writing.
If you call readStreamRead
or writeStreamWrite before
the stream is fully open,
CFStream will do the work of waiting
for the open to occur before actually
performing the read or write.
But of course that means blocking.
At some point you will reach
the end of the bytes available,
or the logical end of a write stream.
This will happen when the read
stream has been completely emptied,
or the write stream has
been completely filled,
assuming you're not talking
to an infinite source.
At that point,
the stream will move to state at end.
Once you've reached this state,
no more bytes will be accepted,
no more bytes will be provided.
Once that happens,
some point in the future,
you're going to close the stream.
This is the stream's queue
to release all of the system
resources it's been holding.
A closed stream can still be useful.
You can still ask it for information
for properties that it's collected
or accumulated as the stream
moved through its lifetime.
But it's useless for
the transfer of bytes.
Finally, we are talking about I/O here.
Something strange can happen at
any point in the stream's lifetime.
Once an error is detected,
the stream will be moved
into the error state.
And errors for CFStreams
are non-recoverable.
All errors are fatal.
You'll have to dispose the
stream and start again.
Oh, and there's a call:
CFReadStreamGetError,
CFWriteStreamGetError to retrieve
the error and allow you to
diagnose what the failure was.
So, that's what a CFStream will do.
How do you get one?
Well, there are custom creation functions
for each of the different kinds
of streams you might want.
Core Foundation provides
in CFStream.h for files,
sockets, and memory.
CFNetwork adds HTTP streams
to the top of that.
So once you've got a stream,
how do you use it?
How do you drive it through its
lifetime and actually get the bytes?
There are three dominant
models for using a CF stream.
They're probably familiar models
to you if you have done I.O.
work in the past.
You can use it in an
event-driven fashion.
You can use it in a blocking fashion,
or you can pull.
Of the three,
we recommend you do event-driven.
It's the most flexible.
It's what's going to allow
you to process your I.O.
in small chunks,
using the CPU for small amounts of time,
and then freeing the CPU for
other work the rest of the time.
The way you use the event-driven
model is create the stream,
set a client on the stream.
The client represents the
entry point into your code.
It's a callback function
together with a refcon that's
going to be passed back to you.
Schedule the stream on a run loop.
That's your way of telling the stream,
"This is the thread I want you to use.
This is the run loop I want you to
use to watch for interesting events."
Then open the stream and just sit back
and wait for the callback to come in.
The stream will do the work of
scheduling any auxiliary objects
that are needed on the run loop.
The run loop will watch for events.
As the events occur, it tells the stream.
The stream looks at the event,
interprets it,
changes it into some notion
of what has happened,
like the stream has finished
opening or bytes have arrived,
and then it triggers your callback.
So let's walk through it in code.
So Doug said I would spend a
moment to talk about contexts,
so I think I'll go ahead and do that now.
Core Foundation is a
reference-counted system as a whole.
You all know that.
One of the implications is that any
time you provide an info pointer,
what you would think of as a refcon,
to a Core Foundation object,
Core Foundation needs to be prepared
to reference-count that object,
because you might very well
want to send in a CF type,
right?
You might use, as I am in this case,
a mutable array to just
collect information.
So it wants to play nicely in
the reference-counting world.
The only way it can do that
is either by simply requiring
that you always pass a CF type.
Well, that's a little limiting.
Or you can do what we
have chosen to do instead,
which is to accept a retain and
a release callback at the same
time as it accepts the pointer.
When you provide a context
to a core foundation object,
it will call the retain callback as sort
of its indication to your RefCon that,
hey, I have now started
remembering your object.
When the core foundation object
is done with your context,
it'll call the release callback to say,
okay, I'm not going to look at
this info pointer anymore.
As far as I'm concerned,
you can dispose of the resources.
At the same time,
there's usually a third callback,
the copy description callback.
That one is purely for debugging use.
It should, if you implement it,
it should print out
some kind of a string,
it should actually return a
CFString describing your info pointer,
and it's automatically called by the
debugging functions in core foundation.
So if you call CF show on a stream,
for instance, after it prints out
the stream information,
it'll then call the copy
description pointer on your,
excuse me, the copy description callback
on your info pointer,
and you can print out your specific
state along with the stream.
So in this case, I've chosen to use a
mutable array as my context.
That's my info pointer.
Since it is a CF type,
I can simply pass CFRetain, CFRelease,
and CFCopyDescription as
my callback functions.
Now I describe which events
in the stream's lifetime I'm
interested in hearing about.
Open completed happens when
that opening process is done.
Has bytes available means there's
bytes available on the stream
that need to be processed.
End encountered happens when
the stream reaches its end.
And then if any error occurs,
of course I want to hear about that too.
Now I call setClient to pass all
that information to the stream.
First argument is a
stream I wish to monitor.
Second argument are the
events I'm interested in.
Then my callback function.
Finally, the context.
Okay,
so now I've got the stream ready to go.
I've set the client,
that's the configuration work,
and I'm ready to open the stream.
Before opening it though,
I would like the stream
to know which thread,
therefore which run loop,
I want to receive my callback on.
So I call schedule with run loop,
pass the stream,
pass the relevant run loop,
here I'm using the current run loop,
and pass the relevant mode,
the common modes in this case.
Then I call open.
Here we go.
Now I'm done, except for waiting for
the callback to come in.
So here's the callback
function handling events.
I'll just spend a moment on
the signature of the callback.
The first argument is the stream
that's reporting the events.
Second argument is what
event has just occurred.
Third argument is the info pointer out of
that context structure that I passed in.
This is just a simple code example.
We're not going to go into much detail.
I'm just going to create a string
describing what event has taken place,
and then append it to that
mutable array I'm passing in.
But in the case of hasBytesAvailable,
I have to do a little more.
When the hasBytesAvailable event occurs,
the stream is telling you, "Hey,
there are bytes waiting to be processed.
Come and do something with them."
And if you don't read them off,
the stream's not going to
give you any more events.
It already told you that
there are bytes waiting.
You already know.
So in order that the stream
can advance in its lifetime,
I'm going to call CFReadStr3m read
and just pull off those bytes.
So what events should I expect
to see in that callback?
Here's the basic event flow.
Assuming you called
readStreamOpen or writeStreamOpen,
you will receive one open completed
event when the open process completes,
then zero or more hasBytes
or canAcceptBytes events,
then finally a single at end event.
If something goes wrong,
you'll receive a single
error occurred event instead.
And once you've received
an error occurred event,
that will be the last one you
will ever receive for that stream.
Now there's another,
this next line focuses on that caveat.
Once you've received a
has bytes available event,
you're not going to receive any more
events until you take care of the
bytes that are sitting in the stream.
The same is true on the write side,
of course.
If you have a write stream,
once you receive can accept bytes,
you're not going to receive
any more events until you
actually perform a write.
Finally,
the client can be changed at any time.
So if you're shuttling a stream back
and forth between a number of different
objects inside your own program,
you're welcome to change the
client and the callback function.
However, keep an eye out for
race conditions because,
of course, events can happen on
the stream at any time,
and they're going to be
dispatched to whichever client
is there when it takes a look.
so that's the event driven model now
I'm going to spend a moment to talk
about the other two models blocking
model is probably the one you're most
familiar with if you've worked with
Berkeley Sockets or the POSIX APIs basic
idea is very simple you open the stream
you just read or write until the stream
is empty each time you call read or
write it's going to block until at
least one byte can be read or written
once at least one byte can be processed
it will go ahead and process as many
bytes as possible without blocking
then the call returns and lets you
know how far the stream has progressed
and sends you back sorry then you
loop and call read again and you wait
until eventually you reach the stream's
end when you're done you just dispose
the stream so it looks like this
If the stream fails to open,
handle the error immediately.
Now, why didn't I have this code
in the event-driven case?
I didn't test the return value
of readStreamOpen in that case.
Well, I didn't test it because
I didn't need to.
If the open had failed,
that would have been an error.
An error is an event that would
have triggered my callback,
so I could safely assume that
my callback would be triggered
to process the error then.
Assuming the stream opens,
now I'm ready to do the work
of just reading the bytes off.
So I'm doing that here:
CFReadStreaM read, pass in the buffer,
look at how many bytes have been read.
For each buffer,
I then go and process the bytes until
I get a return that is non-positive.
If I get a return value of zero,
that means the stream's
reached the end of its life.
On the other hand,
if I get a negative return value,
an error has occurred,
and I need to process that error.
Finally, regardless of what has happened,
I close the stream at the end.
So that's the blocking model.
Now for the polling model.
Polling works about the
way you would expect.
You open the stream.
At various periods,
you want to look at the stream
and see if it has bytes available.
At those times, you call either
CFReadStriemHasBytesAvailable
or CFWriteStriemCanAcceptBytes.
If those return true, well,
then there are bytes
available for you to read,
or you can write in some new bytes.
However, a stream that has errored out is
not considered readable or writable.
So you also have to check to see if
an error has occurred on the stream.
You can do that two ways.
You can either ask the
stream for its status,
or you can call getError.
If you call getError,
it'll simply return zero
if no error has occurred.
So it looks like this.
When I want to pull,
I call CFReadStreaM has bytes available.
If it returns true,
I can now read without blocking.
So I go ahead and do that.
Look at the return value
from readstream read.
If it's positive,
I have bytes and deal with them.
If it's zero, I'm done, finish up.
If it's negative and errors occurred,
I go and handle that.
But if there weren't bytes available,
I need to make this extra call.
I need to get the status of the
stream and see if an error has
occurred while I wasn't looking.
If so, I go and handle it.
So that's it for the basic
handling of a stream,
the basic process of shuttling
bytes to and from a stream.
Now I'm going to talk a little
bit about stream properties.
The properties on a stream represent
any attribute that's not directly
related to moving the bytes around.
It could be something like
the permissions on a file,
it could be something like
the HTTP headers coming
off of an HTTP stream.
Not actually considered part
of the byte transaction.
When I set properties,
I'm configuring the stream.
I'm telling the stream,
"I want you to use SSL encryption.
I want you to behave in
the following fashion."
When you fetch properties,
you're getting out-of-band
information from the stream.
So the properties are
all key value pairs,
much as you might be familiar with
in property lists in core foundation.
The names are all CFStrings,
and the values can be of any CF type.
So to figure it out,
you go to the relevant header file.
It will have a list
of the property names.
With the property names,
there will be a comment explaining
what value you should expect,
or what value you should provide.
So where are those headers?
CFStream.h provides most of
the basic stream information,
so that's files, simple sockets, memory.
CFSocketStream.h in CFNetwork provides
some more advanced socket options,
including SSL encryption,
SOX proxy settings.
and CFHttpStream.h and CFNetwork
provides the HTTP settings.
Now, because the properties
are so very generic,
they're all named from strings,
we need a mechanism to explain when we
receive a property we don't recognize.
If a stream receives a
property it doesn't recognize,
it's simply going to return
null from copy property.
Likewise, set property is going to
return false if you give it a
property it doesn't recognize.
But there are, uh, there are
sorry, but set property might also return
false under another condition.
Most of the time,
you cannot configure a stream
once the open has occurred.
In fact,
you should always assume you cannot
set a configuration option on a stream
if that stream has already opened.
There are a couple exceptions.
Most notably,
you can negotiate up or down
SSL encryption level on a
socket stream on the fly,
but those are all called out in
the header files unless you can
find documentation to the contrary.
Don't do it.
Configure the stream before you open it.
Alright, so a word about using streams
with multiple threads.
So the stream APIs are all thread safe.
However, the individual streams are not.
In other words, you can create streams,
or you can manipulate multiple streams
for multiple threads without any problem,
but if you want to use a particular
stream on multiple threads,
protecting that stream
is your responsibility.
Likewise with multiple run loops.
Multiple run loops
means multiple threads.
Go ahead and schedule the stream
on multiple run loops if you wish.
This is a common technique
when you're writing a server.
You want to maintain a thread pool.
You want whichever thread
is free to handle the stream
if something's available.
So you schedule the stream on
each of the various run loops.
If you do that,
the events are going to be
dispatched in a first-come,
first-served fashion
between the run loops.
The events will not be
duplicated across all run loops.
Just whoever gets to it
first will process the event.
And again, multiple run loops,
multiple threads, protecting the stream
is your responsibility.
Okay, so that's it for the material.
I wanted to take a moment
and do a quick demo.
I will warn you up front,
this is probably the most boring demo
you're going to see at all of WWDC.
It's a simple...
It is a simple echo server,
and it's on the Jaguar CDs.
If you go to developer
examples networking,
you'll find an echo server there.
What I want to do is walk you
through the code in that example.
Now, if I wanted to write an echo server
in absolutely the most compact
fashion using CFSocket and CFStream,
it would be somewhere
between 50 to 100 lines.
And I thought long and hard
about doing that rather than
showing you the sample code.
In the end,
I decided showing you the sample
code was going to be more useful
because then you can go back to that
sample code and look at it yourself.
And also, you know, brevity is not really
the strong point here.
I could probably write an
echo server using native
Berkeley sockets in about 100,
150 lines,
so you're not seeing a huge win there.
But the structure of this
example will show you,
I think, a fair deal about how to use
streams with the run loop.
So here's the echo server.
There are three basic source files.
There's main, which we'll look at first.
And then there's a server file
that deals with the server,
sort of the server object.
And it's quite reusable.
You could take it out,
use it in your own code.
That's in server.c.
And then there's an echo context.
It's what's actually doing the work
of monitoring the accepted sockets,
reading the bytes off,
and then echoing them back out.
So let's start with main.c.
In main,
what I do is I create the server.
That represents the listen socket that's
waiting for connections from clients.
Then I connect it, saying, "OK,
start listening now.
Start waiting for connections."
Assuming it connects successfully,
I just run the run loop, sit back,
wait for the callbacks.
The server object does the work
of setting up the listen socket,
waiting for the connections to come in,
automatically getting the new
socket connected to the client,
and passing it back to this
callback accept connection.
Accept connection then.
It's right up here.
What it's going to do is look
and see if it's got a new client
socket or if an error has occurred.
Assuming it's a new client socket,
all it's going to do is go and create
the echo context to manage that socket,
and then tell the echo context
to go ahead and do its work.
Listening on the socket,
when it gets data,
all it does is copy that data right
out and return it to the client.
Let's look at the server.
Okay, so there's a lot more code here,
like I said, that is really necessary.
It's there primarily to provide
you with an example of how
to manage custom callbacks,
how to manage the whole structure.
What I'm going to do here is
highlight those two functions,
the create function,
which creates the server,
and then the connect function,
which starts the listening on the socket.
First chunk of code is here,
where I set up the
context for the socket.
I'm going to set, use the,
the server object,
the server pointer as the
info pointer for my socket.
Now that's not a CF type,
so I'm going to need to
create custom callbacks.
And here they are listed out here.
Retain, release, and copy description.
They're custom functions in this file,
take a look at them
when you get a chance,
that do the work of managing
reference counting and
describing the underlying object.
Create the server.
Assuming all goes well,
I set the info pointer to be
the newly created server object,
and then I go and create
the listen socket,
the listen CF socket
that I'm going to use.
So here I'm saying I want
a typical TCP socket.
I guess actually this is the part that
describes it as a typical TCP socket.
It's a listen socket,
so I'm interested in the accept callback.
Tell me when new clients have connected
and I have accepted the new connection.
There's my callback function,
and then I pass in the context.
Okay, so far so good.
Now that socket is still
dormant until I give it the
address that it's to listen on.
I do that down here in Server Connect.
What I do is I create a struct
sock adder in to describe the
address the socket should bind to.
The port number actually
came from... Right,
so the port number actually
came in from main.c.
It was passed in by
the creation function.
Before I connect the socket,
I'm going to grab its run
loop source and schedule it.
So there's the run loop.
I get the run loop source.
I add the source to a run loop.
Here I'm adding it to the current
run loop in the common modes.
The run loop is now
holding on to that source,
so I don't need to.
Now I set up the socket address.
There I'm setting the port.
And here I'm using in-add or any,
meaning I don't care what
IP address you listen on.
As long as the IP address is one
of the addresses for this host,
I will listen on it.
Once that's done, I need to create a
CFData around that address.
And then it's ready to
pass off to CFSocket.
CFSocket set address,
I pass the CFSocket,
and I pass the CFData I created.
This is what actually
starts the socket listening.
Once I've made this call,
an underlying Berkeley socket has been
instantiated and is actively sitting
there listening for connections.
So once again,
I'm now ready to just sit back and wait.
I'm waiting for the callback to arrive,
telling me that some
client has connected.
So that callback is here.
Really simple.
We only registered for
one type of callback,
so we're only going to get one type
of callback and accept callback.
Grab the data that we were handed.
Here I'm checking to
see if that data is -1.
-1 would mean that an error has occurred,
otherwise it's the socket
for the new connection.
And now I'm going to call my callback.
This is the callback that was
passed in from main.c that
accepts client connection,
I believe.
To tell my client,
there's a new connection here
that needs to be dealt with.
So back to main.c.
We've got a new connection,
create the echo context, and open it.
So let's take a look at the echo context.
Here's the structure.
There's not a lot here,
but I want to call out these
three run loop sources.
I've got a timer.
This is how I'm going
to time out the stream.
If after a certain amount
of time has elapsed,
if there hasn't been any traffic,
I'm going to kill the socket.
A read stream and a write stream
for managing the socket itself.
Then the mutable data is just my
buffer where I'm going to hold bytes
while I'm transferring them from the
incoming side of the socket before
writing them out to the outgoing side.
Echo context create.
Here we're creating
that new echo context.
I'm not going to go over this.
This is all much the same,
just allocating the memory
and getting it ready for use.
Here's the interesting part.
Given a native socket,
create both a read stream
and a write stream.
Once I've gotten those streams,
I'm going to set a property on it.
Here I'm asking that the stream go
ahead and dispose of the native socket.
Go ahead and close the
underlying Berkeley socket when
the stream itself is destroyed.
And then I'm done.
I just return and wait for my
client for main.c to call open.
So there's Open.
Open starts the work of listening
on the read stream and copying the
bytes across to the write stream.
Looks pretty similar to the
connect call in the server.
Grab the run loop.
Here I'm using the current run loop.
Set up my context.
Set client on the streams.
So I'm asking for the read events.
I'll show you those in a moment.
When one of those events occurs,
call read stream callback.
Here's my context.
Same thing for the write stream.
Now both of the streams
have their clients set,
so I'm ready to schedule.
Schedule it on the current
run loop in the common modes.
Clients been set,
streams have been scheduled,
time to open the stream,
so I do that here.
Okay, so far so good.
Now it's time to set up a run loop timer.
This is going to be,
this is what's going to allow
me to time out those streams.
So I'm asking for a timer that's going
to fire once in k timeouts in seconds.
When that happens,
I want the timer callback to
be called past the context.
Once I've created that timer,
I need to add it to the run loop.
All right, so now we wait for these
callbacks to come in.
I have all three of them here
at the bottom of the file.
There's a read stream callback,
a write stream callback,
and a timer callback.
I'm not going to go over
each of them in detail.
I just want to show you
that they each dispatch,
depending on what event comes in,
they dispatch to a different function.
I'm going to go over the
two most interesting ones:
has bytes available on the read stream.
[Transcript missing]
All I'm going to do
is read the bytes off.
Traffic happened on the socket,
so I want to reset my timer.
I do that here.
Assuming I got some bytes,
I append them to that mutable
data I'm using as a buffer.
And if the write stream
is available right now,
I go ahead and copy them out.
And I do that by triggering exactly
the same function as the callback,
the write stream's
callback would trigger.
So let's look at that one.
All it's going to do,
get the byte pointer
from inside the CFData,
Again, reset the timer because
traffic has happened.
Something interesting has
happened on the socket.
and then write it out.
Now, I said this was exactly the
same as the sample on the CD.
That's not quite true.
The sample on the CD is designed
for use with CFNet services,
so it goes through the extra work of
choosing an arbitrary port on the system,
registering itself so that clients
can discover the Echo server,
and then the client, of course,
uses CFNet services to discover
the server and connect with it.
But I do not want to go
through all of that here,
so I added a single printf to
this program to print out the
port number that was chosen.
I'm going to run this now.
So it's listening on the
local host on port 1059.
Just to prove that,
I'm going to go to terminal now.
And I'm just going to
telnet to that port.
Alright,
so now I've connected to the server,
and hopefully, while I type,
it will echo.
Look, it worked.
Like I said, most boring demo you're
going to see at all of WWDC.
Okay, so that's it for the demo.
Now I'm just going to have
some closing comments,
and then we're going to move on into Q&A.
For more information,
I do encourage you to look at
the examples on the Jaguar CD in
Developer Examples Networking.
There's also a DTS-hosted list,
MacNetworkProg.
I watch that list.
Doug Davidson also watches that list.
You're more than welcome to
send any questions there,
and we'll answer them if we can.
I also encourage you to get
the notes from session 805,
which occurred yesterday evening.
We were talking about CFNetwork and
HTTP streams in particular at that time.